---
toc: true
layout: post
description: Finding minimum edit distance through Dynamic Programming
categories: [slp100]
title: Minimum Edit Distance & Backtracing alignment
---

# Edit Distance

## String Similarity

Much of NLP use-cases spectrum require similarity b/w two strings. This can be considered at two levels,

1. Character level (Spelling Correction): User entered word `graffe` would probably mean `giraffe` rather than `grail` or `coffee` by assuming that `giraffe` is just a character away.
2. Word Level (Coreference Resolution): Strings `Hollywood director James` and `Hollywood movie director James` refer to the same entity. The fact that these differ only by a single word can be used as evidence to decide if these strings are coherent or not.

## Edit Distance

__Edit Distance__ provides a way to quantify the assumptions on string similarities. Specifically, minimum edit distance is the minimum number of operations needed to transform one string to another. Edit distance is inversely proportional to the similarity of strings.

__Cost of operations__: To transform one word to another, three operations are used. Namely, `insert, delete, substitute`. We can assign different costs to each operation. Levenstein, in his alternate version, suggested removing `substitute` operation, thereby meaning `substitute = delete + insert`. If insert, delete have a cost 1, substitute would have a cost 2 for execution.

__Solution Space__: Solution space to transform one word to another is huge. We don't want to exhaust our compute power iterating over all possibilities. Moreover, it is possible, two paths might have the same outcome despite diff paths. Therefore, Dynamic programming is used to find optimal path and edit distance.

## Computing Minimum Edit Distance

Dynamic programming is the concept of solving large problems by combining solutions of sub-problems. 

## References:

Backtracing alignments -> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WBcX8pbHAP4
Computing Minimum Edit Distance -> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgcEaoM_QJA
